[Music]
eight Baker
born in New York in 1826 and reared in
the Michigan wilderness Lafayette Baker
engaged in mechanical and mercantile
pursuits in the state of his birth and
in Philadelphia in 1848 before departing
in 1853 for California
three years later he was an active
member of the vigilance committee this
experience and his admiration of
Francois Vidocq 1775 through 1857 an
infamous Paris detective whom Baker came
to imitate wetted his appetite for
intrigue and the life of the sleuth when
hostilities broke out between the north
and the south
Baker happened to be heading for New
York City on business when he became
aware of the mischief and misdeeds of
Confederate spies and saboteurs in and
around Washington he set out for the
Capitol determined to offer his services
as a union agent footnote C L C Baker
history of the United States Secret
Service
Philadelphia King and Baird 1868 pages
15 through 20
Jacob mogul ever death to traitors
the story of general Lafayette C Baker
Lincoln's forgotten Secret Service chief
New York Doubleday & company 1960 pages
22 through 48 end footnote arriving in
the
strict of Columbia Baker obtained an
interview with General Winfield Scott
commander of the army and himself not
unfamiliar with spy services in need of
information about the rebel forces at
Manassas Scott having already lost five
previous agents on the mission solicited
Baker's assistance after an adventure of
daring and - the intrepid Baker returned
three weeks later with the details
sought by General Scott the success of
the mission earned Baker a permanent
position with the War Department the
next assignment given Baker involved
ferreting out to Baltimore brothers who
were running the Union blockade to
supply munitions to the Confederates
this he did breaking up the smuggling
operation and earning himself a
considerable amount of press publicity
these activities came to the attention
of secretary Seward who hired Baker at
the rate of $100 a month plus expenses
and sent him off to prowl wherever
espionage sabotage or rebel spy agents
were thought to be lurking assisted by
300 Indiana cavalry men Baker was later
ordered to probe the Maryland
countryside for the presence of
revelations and Confederate sympathies
his mission took him to chap Tiko
Leonard's town port tobacco old factory
and the farmland of st. George's st.
Charles and st. Mary's counties as his
column advanced they punished the
disloyal
as a result quote he left behind a trail
of burning buildings frightened men
women and children terrified informers
and bullet pierced secesh tobacco
planters end quote as a consequence
this campaign Baker attempted to
interest Postmaster General Montgomery
Blair in a purge of disloyal Maryland
postmasters replacing them with Union
stalwarts or closing the stations Blair
was well aware of disloyalty among some
of the Maryland postmasters and earlier
had ordered their displacement in a
report to the Secretary of State Baker
claimed he had obtained unlimited
authority to conduct the postmaster
purge and requested a military force of
200 to 300 men to police the localities
in Maryland where these disloyal
officials had been discovered the
proposal was ignored but Baker had a
variety of other tasks to occupy him as
Seward's intelligence chief quote with
enough endurance for a dozen men he
worked almost without rest to educate
himself in the ever spreading operations
of the rebels and their sympathizers he
traveled to Canada to see for himself
what the South was doing to build a fire
in the rear of the Union he made the
acquaintance of police chiefs on the big
northern cities he personally took
prisoners to the harbor forts to look
over conditions he uncovered and jotted
down identities of suppliers of war
goods to the south he acquired a
first-hand knowledge of secesh
supporting newspapers in sedition ridden
New York New Jersey and the seething
West only on rare occasions when
official duty took him there did he see
his wife Jenny who had gone to the
security of her parents home in
Philadelphia end quote as a consequence
of Lincoln's st. Valentine's Day
directive regarding the release of
political prisoners and limiting
extraordinary arrests to quote the
direction of the military authorities
alone end quote Baker was recommended to
the War Department and its new secretary
Edwin M Stanton in accepting Baker's
services Stanton warned him of the grave
and desperate situation facing the
government advised him that he would
never be permitted to disclose the
authority for his actions and gave
notice that he would be expected to
pursue all enemies of the
Union regardless of their station power
loyalty partisanship or profession
bakers detective service was to be the
terror of the north as well as the South
secretly funded and accountable
exclusively and directly to the
Secretary of War quote the enemies of
the state took many forms an enemy could
be a pretty girl with swaying hips
covered by an acre of crinoline carrier
of rebellion sustaining contraband goods
or an enemy could be a contractor
selling the Union shoddy clothing or an
enemy could be a copperhead sapping the
strength of the Union by discouraging
enlistments an enemy could also be a
Union general with larceny in his soul
gambling away the pay of his soldiers he
could be a guerrilla with a torch firing
a government Corral within sight of the
White House end quote
for three years Baker gathered
intelligence on the enemies of the Union
reporting his findings to Stanton and
Lincoln in addition at their direction
or sometimes on his own authority he
functioned as an instrument for directly
punishing the enemy or for arresting and
incarcerating them utilizing his
intelligence sources Baker identified
and prejudged the despoilers of the
Union relying upon extraordinary
military authority and martial law he
seized his foe in his capacity as a
federal policeman and as the custodian
of the Old Capitol prison and its
nefarious annex the Carroll prison he
served as jailer of those he captured a
baker's commander-in-chief one authority
has commented quote no one can ever know
just what Lincoln conceived to be limits
of his powers end quote
and his own words the sixteenth
president wrote quote my oath to
preserve the Constitution to the best of
my ability imposed upon me the duty of
preserving by every indispensable means
that government that nation of which
that Constitution was the organic law
was it possible to lose the nation and
yet preserve the Constitution by general
law life and limb must be protected yet
often a limb must be amputated to save a
life but a life is never wisely given to
save a limb
I felt that measures otherwise
unconstitutional might become lawful by
becoming indispensable to the
preservation of the Constitution through
the preservation of the nation right or
wrong I assumed this ground and now avow
it I could not feel that to the best of
my ability I had ever tried to preserve
the Constitution if to save slavery or
any minor matter
I should permit the wreck of government
country and constitution all together
end quote and in the more contemporary
view of Clinton Rossiter quote mr.
Lincoln subscribed to a theory that in
the absence of Congress and in the
presence of an emergency the president
has the right and duty to adopt measures
which would ordinarily be illegal
subject to the necessity of subsequent
congressional approval he did more than
this he seemed to assert that the war
powers of the Constitution could upon
occasion devolve completely upon the
president if their exercise was based
upon public opinion and an inexorable
necessity they were then sufficient to
embrace any action within the fields of
executive or legislative or even
judicial power essential to the
preservation of the Union he implied
that this government like all others
possessed an absolute power of
self-defense a power to be exerted by
the president of the United States and
this power extended to the breaking of
the fundamental laws of the nation if
such a step were unavoidable and
quote the presence of this operating
viewpoint at the highest level of the
executive branch coupled with his own
personal ambitions for power and
prestige contributed significantly to
Baker's zealous authoritarian and often
illegal manner of carrying out his War
Department mission nevertheless Baker
must be recognized as a professional
thoroughly familiar with the methods and
tactics of his profession reflecting a
classically Machiavellian perspective he
once wrote quote it may be said that the
deception and Mis statements resorted to
and inseparable from the detective
service are demoralizing and proved
unsoundness of character and its
officers but it must be borne in mind
that in war no commander fails to
deceive the enemy when possible to
secure the least advantage spies Scouts
intercepted correspondence feints and
army movements misrepresentations of
military strength and position are
regarded as honorable means of securing
victory over the foe the work of the
detectives is simply deception reduced
to a science or profession and whatever
objection on ethical grounds may lie
against the Secret Service lies with
equal force against the strategy and
tactics of Washington
Scott grant and the host of their
illustrious associates in the Wars of
the world war is a last and terrible
resort in the defense of even a
righteous cause and sets at defiance all
of the ordinary laws and customs of
society overriding the rights of
property and the sanctity of the Sabbath
and not until the nation learns war no
more will the work of deception and
waste of morals men and treasures cease
end quote establish
offices at 217 Pennsylvania Avenue in
close proximity to both the White House
and the War Department Baker began
gathering recruits and organizing his
unit operating without official status
the group was generally referred to as
the Secret Service Bureau its personnel
known only to Baker in terms of number
and complete identity or no credentials
other than a small silver badge secretly
commissioned as a colonel baker
initially represented himself when
absolutely necessary as an agent of the
War Department later he publicly cited
his military rank and held the title of
provost marshal quote he initiated the
nation's first police dossier system
although the rebels the copperheads and
the misguided among the loyalists in the
north charged him with poking his
private eyes into the homes of the
innocent he gathered systematically the
first criminal photo file enabling a
more efficient pursuit of the enemies of
the nation he instituted a policy of
seizing suspects in the dead of night
when their resistance to interrogation
and their ability to seek help would be
at the lowest ebb he made a science of
the interrogation of prisoners using
teams of detectives to work over a
suspect until he was satisfied he either
had the full story
or he could drag no more information
from his victim he established a secret
fund for building and feeding a vast
army of informers and unlisted agents
no one except he knew the full range of
his organization even his most trusted
aides were not allowed to know the
identity of all of his operatives end
quote for reasons of both security and
strategy Baker's agents were divided
into daylight and nighttime units the
men in one group did not know the
identity of those in the other and
another section counted operatives who
infiltrated and trafficked in the
capital's High Society he cultivated
contacts with the police in the nation's
major cities and kept a close watch on
Confederate activities in Canada
by the summer of 1863 a branch office
had been set up in New York City and he
succeeded in placing his personnel in
the post office for purposes of
inspecting the mails on two occasions
baker's spies service gathered
intelligence which probably contributed
to the downfall of general McClellan
Baker's personal penetration of the
Confederate forces at Manassas resulted
in the discovery that the fortifications
and artillery which were supposedly
keeping McClellan's army at bay were
actually earthen and wooden fakes and
later Lincoln utilized the services of
one of baker's agents to secretly
observe McClellan's conduct on the
battlefield with the decline of
McClellan Allan Pinkerton whom Baker
regarded as sagacious departed from the
scene leaving some agents and the spy
field to Baker the only other threat to
Baker's supreme command of Secret
Service operations was the reputed
organizer of the old Mexican spy company
Ethan Allen Hitchcock but he was found
to be an old man seized with mysticism
and pursuits of alchemy with no desires
for any responsibilities in the
hostilities in June of 1863 Baker gained
an open commission in the army with the
rank of colonel the opportunity to wear
the Union uniform and command of a
military police force he had sought for
some time the exact size of the unit is
not known or its losses or its complete
record of action after much pressuring
from Baker Stanton agreed to establish
the troop utilizing authority entitling
the District of Columbia to a battalion
of infantry and cavalry for use within
its confines footnote moglie ver page
214 the District of Columbia had only
one cavalry unit during the Civil War
but counted the 1st and 2nd regiment
infantry serving from 1861 until 1865
and several short-lived infantry
battalions and militia companies which
were hastily organized in 1861 and
mustered out by the end of the year
footnote placed under the direct
authority of the Secretary of War the
first regiment cavalry known as Baker's
Rangers consistent ironically of
recruits from robert e lee's former
command the second dragoons renamed the
second regular United States cavalry at
the outbreak of the war quote hundreds
of men sought places in the new regiment
some offered bribes whether the
attraction was the promise that no
soldier in the Baker command would ever
be sent outside the immediate vicinity
of the District of Columbia or whether
Baker's Fame inspired all types of
adventurers to flock to his banner was
the subject of much conjecture at that
time end quote
in an appeal to the Governor of New York
Baker wrote quote the duties to be
performed by this regiment demand on the
part of both men and officers qualities
of a high order both mental and physical
among these I may enumerate intelligence
sobriety self-dependence bodily vigour
the power of endurance and though last
not least that knowledge of the horse
which results from early practical
experience and management of that noble
animal end quote the personal
qualifications of Baker's recruits of
course cannot be assessed by their
actions however they demonstrated great
military ability intense loyalty to
their commander and a complete
insensitivity to the property liberties
and lives of those they encountered as
enemies for reasons of high morality and
public image the Rangers were unleashed
upon the gambling parlors and vise dens
of Washington soon however they began
engaging in forays of destruction
against enemies of the Union beyond the
confines of the Capitol the Rangers were
an auxilary to Baker's intelligence
activities they were his agents of
espionage enforcement and protection
secret operatives gathered information
in both the cities and the country sides
of the Potomac region Baker devoured
their reports conferred with Stanton
and/or Lincoln
and then set out with enforcement's
against the subversives in addition to
ferreting out spies blockade runners and
locals giving aid and comfort to the
rebels Baker engaged in three major
intelligence enterprises unmasking
crimes in the Treasury Department
smashing the Northwest conspiracy and
capturing the president's assassin
footnote Baker's own account of his
bureau's activities and his troops
adventures is thin and compared with the
mug leaver account which relies on
Baker's correspondence and the letters
and diaries of relatives fails to convey
the questionable nature of their
operations or their possible illegality
see baker pages 147 through 198 - 30
through 241 253 through 261 329 through
378 and 384 through 452 and footnote the
opportunity to probe the Treasury
Department regarding allegations that it
had become a bawdy-house and command
post for certain predatory interests
arose around Christmas 1863 when
Treasury secretary Salman P chase
invited Baker to investigate the
situation quote there was growing talk
of scandals in the Treasury Department
newspapers were saying that the hundreds
of girls busy scissoring the new
greenbacks
or hussies in the night there were
oysters feasts in the bonnet room clerks
were making off with sheets of uncut
currency counterfeiters were discovering
it was easier to steal a plate and run
off bails of money rather than go to the
trouble of making an imitation engraving
in some hideaway the Treasury's own
police seemed helpless to stem the tide
of corruption and debauchery the Blair
family allowed enemies of Chase were
giving support to the rumors Postmaster
General montgomery Blair's brother Frank
cried out for congressional inquiry end
quote
footnote Magalie
page 249 in 1863 Congress authorized the
secretary of the Treasury to appoint
three revenue agents to aid in the
prevention detection and punishment of
frauds upon the revenue these were the
small beginnings of the Treasury
Department's intelligence organization
and the only designated investigative
force available to the secretary at the
time of the Baker inquiry end footnote
the probe was charged and politically
explosive Seward eyes upon the 1864
election and the White House beyond
might well have wanted Lincoln's top
detective mired in the scandals diffused
and defamed along with most of the
administration in Hanson a Risley
special Treasury agent Seward had his
own source of intelligence so close were
the two men that Rizzoli gave over one
of his daughters to Seward for adoption
and after mrs. Seward's death the old
man
sought her for his second wife in
detailing Baker to Treasury
Stanton probably thought he would be the
best man to vindicate the President as
untainted honest and ignorant of the
conditions there himself a frequent
critic of Lincoln the Secretary of War
nevertheless realized that public
confidence in the President must be
maintained in the midst of the moments
perils and he might well have been aware
that Lincoln had no direct involvement
in the Treasury calamities factions
within Congress were ready to intervene
to attack Lincoln Chase and Baker
ultimately a committee of investigation
was formed probed the situation and be
clouded the facts and the guilt of those
involved
Baker plunged into the Treasury probe
with ferocity and determination he
temporarily relinquished command of the
Raiders and established an office in the
dark basement of the Treasury building
his techniques were direct and dauntless
he stalked the printing facilities and
subjected clerks and lessor officials to
ruthless and merciless interrogation at
one juncture he halted a funeral cortege
in the midst of the city seized the
corpse of a Treasury girl and had an
examination made to determine if her
death had resulted from an abortion and
what did Baker find at the outset he
discovered the young James Cornwall who
had the function of burning mutilated
bonds and notes had pocketed $2,000
worth of notes Cornwall was convicted
and sent to jail for this offense the
only individual to be prosecuted for
crimes against the Treasury in this
probe next Baker alleged that two
printers who had sold the Treasury new
presses paper and a technique for
printing currency were conspiring to
sell the government worthless machinery
and processes their presses were
weakening the upper floors of the
Treasury Building and their security
procedures were virtually non-existent
allowing ready access to both plates and
process in the midst of the inquiry the
new presses began malfunctioning and
greater demands were placed on the
building for improved printing devices
Baker discovered that the head of the
Department of printing and engraving
Spencer Clark was involved with the
number of young women who were cutting
and preparing new currency an associate
of Clark's was also implicated and both
men were named for dismissal by Baker
eventually it came to pass that it was
Secretary Chase who was to resign and
the great Treasury scandal passed into
history in mid-november of 1863 a full
month before the Treasury investigation
got underway rumors of a dangerous
conspiracy along the Canadian border
began circulating Baker's agents pursued
the facts of the matter and by late
spring of the following year a fairly
clear image of the attack planned by the
Confederates was evident in Richmond
Judah P Benjamin Secretary of State for
the rebel government a holder of three
cabinet posts in the Confederacy and a
man of imagination conceived a desperate
plan of havoc utilizing secret societies
reminiscent of the later Ku Klux Klan
guerrilla warriors behind Union lines
would burn down New York City free rebel
troops imprisoned in the north to loot
and pillage throughout the industrial
northeast and seize Chicago Buffalo and
Indianapolis the plan failed to
recognize the drift of northern morale
those disenchanted with the war still
supported Lincoln sought the Union as
was and the Constitution as is and
otherwise had no interest in or sympathy
for a separate Confederate nation in the
aftermath of the destructive campaigns
of generals Sheridan in the Shenandoah
Valley and Sherman in Georgia the rebels
were ready for unconventional warfare of
their own making the Copperhead
firebrand Clement Vallandigham was
recruited to obtain support for a new
nation composed of states adjacent to
the Canadian border army officers in
civilian dress were dispatched north to
act as terrorists
the first target for revenge was Chicago
assembled in Toronto the band of
insurgents made their plans all of which
were carefully recorded by a baker
informer
commanders of military prisons were
informed of these developments and
advised to be prepared for uprisings
within or attacks from outside of their
institutions Baker advanced a squadron
of agents to Toronto to maintain
surveillance of the conspirators who
were followed and observed as they
straggled into Chicago in the midst of
the Democratic National Convention more
than 2,000 civilian clad Confederate
soldiers were scattered around the city
at the height of the convention
proceedings the area would be put to the
torch while police and firemen fought
the flames an attack would be made on
Camp Douglas and its prisoners freed the
banks would be looted City Hall seized
and the police headquarters occupied
thus the second largest city in the land
was to fall to rebel control politics
among the conspirators caused a
postponement of their assault until
Election Day after reassembling in
Toronto burnings and attacks on local
authorities were scheduled for
simultaneous occurrence in Chicago New
York Cincinnati and Boston still the
surveillance of these preparations
continued and still flowed the informers
details to Baker offensive actions were
unleashed against the terrorists without
warning General Benjamin F Butler
seasoned in maintaining the security and
serenity of New Orleans marched into New
York with 10,000 Union troops as the
clock moved toward Election Day
Confederate arsonists abandoned their
grandiose plan of havoc set a few fires
in some hotels which were quickly
extinguished and fled to Canada across
the border they soon learned that they
had been fortunate in their escape a
Baker spy in Chicago brought about the
ruination of terrorist activities in
that city and a Union operative in
Indiana gathered enough information to
implicate almost the entire band of
Confederate conspirators in that state
while these elements were being rounded
up and jailed Union authorities took an
imprisoned Confederate officer into
their intelligence Corps swore him to
loyalty to the
and cause and released him to make
contact with some of the remaining
members of the Northwest conspiracy
followed by Baker's agents the man soon
met with a group seeking to liberate
3,000 rebel officers incarcerated on
Johnson's island in Lake Michigan the
intervention of this spy cost the
conspirators a cache of arms and the
loss of a few men in Chicago and
indirectly contributed to the scuttling
of the Johnsons Island mission by late
fall 1864 the Northwest conspiracy had
collapsed and its principal leaders and
organizers had been jailed quote the
excitement and stimulation of the chase
ended Baker found himself in a now
familiar situation he was given no
public credit for his part in smashing
the great conspiracy on the contrary his
enemies increased their efforts to build
up the ugly image of the Bastille master
and he continued to be identified in the
public mind with unjust arrests and
imprisonments invasions of the rights of
private persons and rumored profiteering
Baker still knew that as a secret agent
the details of his activities must
remain secret if however he had hoped
that this sensational case would change
the attitude toward him in Congress and
administration circles or would convince
the Copperheads that he put the Union
before personal gain he must have been
sadly disappointed his success in
securing and transmitting information
which led to the dramatic collapse of
the great conspiracy and the punishment
of its leaders in the north still
brought him no evidence that his
services were to be fairly judged by the
results he achieved for the Union cause
end quote Baker had just completed a
successful investigation of fraud and
deception surrounding the draft
bounty-hunting defrauding sailors out of
prize money and efforts at morally
corrupting union troops in the New York
City area when he received the news of
Lincoln's assassination undoubtedly he
felt guilt for not having had advance
information about the conspiracy against
the president and for not having had
agents near the chief executive when the
murderer struck upon receiving word that
Lincoln had been shot and was dead Baker
threw himself into the pursuit and
capture of those responsible for the
crime after producing a handbill the
first to be circulated for a nationally
wanted criminal describing John Wilkes
Booth in detail Baker said about
interrogating everyone and anyone who
knew anything about the conspirators
involved in the assassination quote
Stanton went along with the detectives
thinking and supported his tigerish
moves to stalk his prey
one by one booths accomplices were
rounded up
Baker's rival police agencies did most
of the work but he took charge of the
prisoners dragged incriminating
admissions from them put black hoods on
their heads and stuffed them in the hold
of a monitor in the river end quote
finally Baker found booths track pursued
him with a command of cavalry and came
at last to the Garrett farm where the
assassin had taken refuge in a barn his
prey cornered Baker confronted the
killer demanded his surrender or the
alternative of firing the barn in the
midst of negotiations and flames booth
was shot by either himself or by
sergeant Boston Corbett Baker took
charge of the body and later sought a
portion of the rewards for capturing
Booth the amount subsequently awarded
Baker was reduced to three thousand
seven hundred fifty dollars from a
potential of seventeen thousand five
hundred dollars the Secret Service chief
continued to be unpopular with the
Congress with the death of Lincoln Baker
became the protector of the new
President Andrew Johnson and set up the
first White House Secret Service detail
in the history of the Republic with the
Peace of Appomattox however the career
of the spy chief began to rapidly
decline the rebel foe of wartime now
walked the streets of the capital
many of the prostitutes and gamblers
Baker had jailed under military law were
again free these together with political
enemies taunted and reproached the once
powerful Secret Service a vestige of war
which seemed to have no future mission
nevertheless Baker attempted to carry on
in the old style his task was to protect
the president his immediate foe he
surmised were various female pardon
brokers lately sympathetic to the south
who prevailed upon the President to
grant clemency and forgiveness to all
manner of rebels in attempting to halt
this traffic in and out of the White
House
Baker incurred the wrath of President
Johnson and a lawsuit which successfully
damaged his status and role in the midst
of the trial he was routinely mustered
out of the army and effectively left
without a friend or defender he departed
Washington in disgrace returned to his
wife in Philadelphia wrote his memoirs
and lieu of finding other work
contracted spinal meningitis and died on
the evening of July
third 1868 Lafayette Baker was a zealot
who imbued with a strong sense of
righteousness and a taste of vigilantism
in the name of a cause became oblivious
to the ends means relationship
underlying his function in his defence
of the Union and democratic government
he resorted to extreme actions obnoxious
to popular rule and in some instances in
violation of constitutional guarantees
he actively sought to exceed his
intelligence role and became policeman
judge and jailer his desires in this
regard and his capacity for achievement
of same were fostered and fed by the
exigencies of the moment and the
liberties Lincoln took in administering
or not administering the law when
Lincoln died and the war ended Baker
became a political pariah with a vestige
ol function his activities had annoyed
many frightened some and made bitter
enemies of an important and powerful few
with the onset of peace in the nation he
was virtually stripped of his
organization and official status and
left vulnerable to legal political and
financial reprisals these forces
converged coalesced and crushed due to
the secret nature of Baker's operations
and his tendency to embellish fact the
full account of the activities of this
spy chief may never be known in all
likelihood his record of service will
always be controversial and of debatable
value
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you